h1. Building

To remove any confusion, Buildr's build task is actually called @build@.  It's
also the default task that executes when you run @buildr@ without any task
name.

The @build@ task runs two other tasks: @compile@ and its associated tasks (that
would be, @resources@) and @test@ and its associated tasks (@test:compile@,
@test:setup@ and friends).  We'll talk about @compile@ more in this section,
and @test@ later on.  We'll also show you how to run @build@ without testing,
not something we recommend, but a necessary feature.

Why @build@ and not @compile@?  Some projects do more than just compiling.
Other projects don't compile at all, but perform other build tasks, for
example, creating a database schema or command line scripts.  So we want you to
get in the practice of running the @build@ task, and help you by making it the
default task.


h2. Compiling

Each project has its own @compile@ task you can invoke directly, by running
@buildr compile@ or as part of another build task.  (Yes, that @build@).

The @compile@ task looks for source files in well known directories, determines
which compiler to use, and sets the target directory accordingly.  For example,
if it finds any Java source files in the @src/main/java@ directory, it selects
the Javac compiler and generates bytecode in the @target/classes@ directories.
If it finds Scala source files in the @src/main/scala@ directory it selects the
Scalac compiler, and so forth.
A single project cannot use multiple compilers at the same time, hence you may 
prefer creating subprojects by programming language. 
Some compilers like Groovy's are joint-compilers, this means they can handle 
several languages. When the Groovy compiler is selected for a project, .groovy 
and .java files are compiled by groovyc.

Most often, that's just good enough and the only change you need to make is
adding compile dependencies.  You can use @compile.dependencies@ to get the
array of dependency file tasks.  For Java, each of these tasks points to a JAR
or a directory containing Java classes, and the entire set of dependencies is
passed to Javac as the classpath.

Buildr uses file tasks to handle dependencies, but here we're talking about the
Rake dependency mechanism.  It's a double entendre.  It invokes these tasks
before running the compiler.  Some of these tasks will download JARs from
remote repositories, others will create them by compiling and packaging from a
different project.  Using file task ensures all the dependencies exist before
the compiler can use them.

An easier way to specify dependencies is by calling the @compile.with@ method.
It takes a list of arguments and adds them to the dependency list.  The
@compile.with@ method is easier to use, it accepts several type of
dependencies.  You can use file names, file tasks, projects, artifacts
specifications and even pass arrays of dependencies.

Most dependencies fall into the last three categories.  When you pass a project
to @compile.with@, it picks up all the packages created by that project.  In
doing so, it establishes an order of dependency between the two projects (see
"Defining the Project":projects.html#defining_the_project).  For example, if
you make a change in project _teh-api_ and build _teh-impl_, Buildr will detect
that change, recompile and package _teh-api_ before compiling _teh-impl_.  You
can also select a specific package using the @package@ or @packages@ methods
(see "Packaging":packaging.html).

When you pass an artifact specification to @compile.with@, it creates an
@Artifact@ task that will download that artifact from one of the remote
repositories, install it in the local repository, and use it in your project.
Rake's dependency mechanism is used here to make sure the artifact is
downloaded once, when needed.  Check the "Artifacts":artifacts.html section for
more information about artifact specification and repositories.

For now let's just show a simple example:

{{{!ruby
compile.with 'org.apache.axis2:axis2:jar:1.2',
  'org.apache.derby:derby:jar:10.1.2.1', projects('teh-api', 'teh-impl')
}}}

Passing arrays to @compile.with@ is just a convenient for handling multiple
dependencies, we'll show more examples of that when we talk about
"Artifacts":#artifacts.

Likewise, the @compile@ task has an array of file tasks that point at the
source directories you want to compile from.  You can access that array by
calling @compile.sources@.  You can use @compile.from@ to add new source
directories by passing a file name or a file task.

For example, let's run the APT tool on our annotated source code before
compiling it:

{{{!ruby
compile.from apt
}}}

When you call @apt@ on a project, it returns a file task that points to the
@target/generated/apt@ directory.  This file task executes by running APT,
using the same list of source directories, dependencies and compiler options.
It then generates new source files in the target directory.  Calling
@compile.from@ with that file task includes those additional source files in
the list of compiled sources.

Here's another example:

{{{!ruby
jjtree = jjtree(_('src/main/jjtree'), :in_package=>'com.acme')
compile.from javacc(jjtree, :in_package=>'com.acme'), jjtree
}}}

This time, the variable @jjtree@ is a file task that reads a JJTree source file
from the @src/main/jjtree@ directory, and generates additional source files in
the @target/generated/jjtree@ directory.  The second line creates another file
task that takes those source files, runs JavaCC on them, and generates yet more
source files in @target/generated/javacc@.  Finally, we include both sets of
source files in addition to those already in @src/main/java@, and compile the
lot.

The interesting thing about these two examples is how you're wiring file tasks
together to create more complicated tasks, piping the output of one task into
the inputs of another.  Wiring tasks this way is the most common way to handle
complex builds, and uses Rake's dependency mechanism to only run tasks when it
detects a change to one of the source files.

You can also control the target directory.  Use @compile.target@ to get the
target directory file task.  If you need to change the target directory, call
the @compile.into@ method with the new path.

We use method pairs to give you finer control over the compiler, but also a way
to easily configure it.  Methods like @dependencies@ and @sources@ give you a
live array you can manipulate, or iterate over.  On the other hand, methods
like @with@ and @from@ accept a wider set of arguments and clean them up for
you.  The also all return the same task you're calling, so you can chain
methods together.

For example:

{{{!ruby
compile.from('srcs').with('org.apache.axis2:axis2:jar:1.2').
  into('classes').using(:target=>'1.4')
}}}

Buildr uses the method pair and method chaining idiom in many places to make
your life easier without sacrificing flexibility.

Occasionally, you'll need to post-process the generated bytecode.  Since you
only want to do that after compiling, and let the compiler decide when to do
that – only when changes require re-compiling – you'll want to extend the
@compile@ task.  You can do that by calling @compile@ with a block.

For example, to run the OpenJPA bytecode enhancer after compiling the source
files:

{{{!ruby
compile { open_jpa_enhance }
}}}

You can change various compile options by calling, you guessed,
@compile.options@.  For example, to set the compiler to VM compatibility with
Java 1.5 and turn on all Lint messages:

{{{!ruby
compile.options.target = '1.5'
compile.options.lint = 'all'
}}}

Or, if you want to chain methods together:

{{{!ruby
compile.using :target=>'1.5', :lint=>'all'
}}}

Sub-projects inherit compile options from their parent project, so you only
need to change these settings once in the top project.  You can do so, even if
the top project itself doesn't compile anything.

The options available to you depend on which compiler you are using for this
particular project, obviously the options are not the same for Java and Flash.
Two options are designed to work consistently across compilers.

Buildr turns the @warning@ option on by default, but turns it off when you run
@buildr --silent@.  It also sets the @debug@ option on, but turns it off when
making a release.  You can also control the @debug@ option from the command
line, for example:

{{{!ruby
# When calling buildr
$ buildr compile debug=off

# Once until we change the variable
$ export DEBUG=off
$ buildr compile
}}}


h3. Compiling Java

The Java compiler looks for source files in the project's @src/main/java@
directory, and defaults to compiling them into the @target/classes@ directory.
It looks for test cases in the project's @src/test/java@ and defaults to
compile them into the @target/test/classes@ directory.

If you point the @compile@ task at any other source directory, it will use the
Java compiler if any of these directories contains files with the extension
@.java@.

When using the Java compiler, if you don't specify the packaging type, it
defaults to JAR.  If you don't specify the test framework, it defaults to
JUnit.

The Java compiler supports the following options:

* @:debug@ -- Generates bytecode with debugging information.  You can also
override this by setting the environment variable @debug@ to @off@.
* @:deprecation@ -- If true, shows deprecation messages.  False by default.
* @:lint@ -- Defaults to false.  Set this option to true to use all lint
options, or specify a specific lint option (e.g. @:lint=>'cast'@).
* @:other@ -- Array of options passed to the compiler (e.g.
@:other=>'-implicit:none'@).
* @:source@ -- Source code compatibility (e.g. '1.5').
* @:target@ -- Bytecode compatibility (e.g. '1.4').
* @:warnings@ -- Issue warnings when compiling.  True when running in verbose
mode.


h3. Compiling Scala

Before using the Scala compiler, you must first set the environment variable
@SCALA_HOME@.

The Scala compiler looks for source files in the project's @src/main/scala@
directory, and defaults to compiling them into the @target/classes@ directory.
It looks for test cases in the project's @src/test/scala@ and defaults to
compile them into the @target/test/classes@ directory.

If you point the @compile@ task at any other source directory, it will use the
Scala compiler if any of these directories contains files with the extension
@.scala@.

When using the Scala compiler, if you don't specify the packaging type, it
defaults to JAR.

The Scala compiler supports the following options:

* @:debug@ -- Generates bytecode with debugging information.  You can also
override this by setting the environment variable @debug@ to @off@.
* @:deprecation@ -- If true, shows deprecation messages.  False by default.
* @:optimise@ -- Generates faster bytecode by applying optimisations to the program.
* @:other@ -- Array of options passed to the compiler (e.g.
@:other=>'-Xprint-types'@).
* @:source@ -- Source code compatibility (e.g. '1.5').
* @:target@ -- Bytecode compatibility (e.g. '1.4').
* @:warnings@ -- Issue warnings when compiling.  True when running in verbose
mode.

You may use @fsc@, the Fast Scala Compiler, which submits compilation jobs to a
compilation daemon, by setting the environment variable @USE_FSC@ to @yes@.   Note
that @fsc@ _may_ cache class libraries -- don't forget to run @fsc -reset@ if you 
upgrade a library.

h3. Compiling Groovy

Before using the Groovy compiler, you must first require it on your buildfile:

{{{!ruby
   require 'java/groovyc'
}}}

Once loaded, the groovyc compiler will be automatically selected if any .groovy
source files are found under @src/main/groovy@ directory, compiling them by 
default into the @target/classes@ directory. 
If the project has java sources in @src/main/java@ they will get compiled using 
the groovyc joint compiler.

Sources found in @src/test/groovy@ are compiled into the @target/test/classes@.

If you don't specify the packaging type, it defaults to JAR.

The Groovy compiler supports the following options:
 * @encoding@ -- Encoding of source files
 * @verbose@ -- Asks the compiler for verbose output, true when running in 
     verbose mode.
 * @fork@ -- Whether to execute groovyc using a spawned instance of the JVM; 
     defaults to no
 * @memoryInitialSize@ -- The initial size of the memory for the underlying VM, 
     if using fork mode; ignored otherwise. 
     Defaults to the standard VM memory setting. (Examples: 83886080, "81920k", or "80m")
 * @memoryMaximumSize@ -- The maximum size of the memory for the underlying VM, 
     if using fork mode; ignored otherwise. 
     Defaults to the standard VM memory setting. (Examples: 83886080, "81920k", or "80m")
 * @listfiles@ -- Indicates whether the source files to be compiled will be listed; 
     defaults to no
 * @stacktrace@ -- If true each compile error message will contain a stacktrace
 * @warnings@ -- Issue warnings when compiling.  True when running in verbose mode.
 * @debug@ -- Generates bytecode with debugging information.  Set from the debug
     environment variable/global option.
 * @deprecation@ -- If true, shows deprecation messages.  False by default.
 * @optimise@ -- Generates faster bytecode by applying optimisations to the program.
 * @source@ -- Source code compatibility.
 * @target@ -- Bytecode compatibility.
 * @javac@ -- Hash of options passed to the ant javac task


h2. Resources

The @compile@ task comes bundled with a @resources@ task.  It copies files from
the @src/main/resources@ directory into @target/resources@.  Best used for
copying files that you want to included in the generated code, like
configuration files, i18n messages, images, etc.

The @resources@ task uses a filter that can change files as it copies them from
source to destination.  The most common use is by mapping values using a hash.
For example, to substitute "${version}" for the project's version number and
"${copyright}" for "Acme Inc (C) 2007" :

{{{!ruby
resources.filter.using 'version'=>version,
  'copyright'=>'Acme Inc (C) 2007'
}}}

You can specify a different format by passing it as the first argument.
Supported formats include:

* @:ant@ -- Map from <code>@key@</code> to value.
* @:maven@ -- Map from @${key}@ to value (default).
* @:ruby@ -- Map from @#{key}@ to value.
* @Regexp@ -- Map using the matched value of the regular expression (e.g.
@/=(.*?)=/@).

For example, using the @:ruby@ format instead of the default @:maven@ format:

{{{!ruby
resources.filter.using :ruby, 'version'=>version,
  'copyright'=>'Acme Inc (C) 2007'
}}}

For more complicated mapping you can also pass a method or a proc.  The filter
will call it once for each file with the file name and content.

If you need to copy resource files from other directories, add these source
directories by calling the @from@ method, for example:

{{{!ruby
resources.from _('src/etc')
}}}

You can select to copy only specific files using common file matching patterns.
For example, to include only HTML files:

{{{!ruby
resources.include '*.html'
}}}

To include all files, except for files in the @scratch@ directory:

{{{!ruby
resources.exclude 'scratch/*'
}}}

The filter always excludes the @CVS@ and @.svn@ directories, and all files
ending with @.bak@ or @~@, so no need to worry about these.

A file pattern can match any file name or part of a file name using an asterisk
(@*@).  Double asterisk (@**@) matches directories recursively, for example,
@'src/main/java/**/*.java'@.  You can match any character using a question mark
(@?@), or a set of characters using square brackets (@[]@), similar to regular
expressions, for example, @'[Rr]eadme'@. You can also match from a set of names
using curly braces (@{}@), for example, @'*.{html,css}'@.

You can use filters elsewhere.  The @filter@ method creates a filter, the
@into@ method sets the target directory, and @using@ specifies the mapping.
Last, you call @run@ on the filter to activate it.

For example:

{{{!ruby
filter('src/specs').into('target/specs').
  using('version'=>version, 'created'=>Time.now).run
}}}

The @resources@ task is, in fact, just a wrapper around such a filter that
automatically adds the @src/main/resources@ directory as one of the source
directories.


h2. More On Building

The @build@ task runs the @compile@ (and @resources@) tasks as prerequisites,
followed by any actions you add to it, and completes by running the @test@
task.  The @build@ task itself is a prerequisite to other tasks, for example,
@package@ and @upload@.

You can extend the @build@ task in two ways.  You can add more prerequisites
that will execute before the task itself, or you can add actions that will
execute as part of the task.  Which one you choose is up to you, we'll show you
how they differ in a second.  If you call @build@ with a list of tasks, it adds
these tasks as prerequisites.  Call @build@ with a block, and it adds that
block as an action.  Again, a common idiom you'll see elsewhere in Buildr and
Rake.

Let's look at a simple example.  Say we want to generate a Derby database form
an SQL file and include it in the ZIP package:

{{{!ruby
db = Derby.create(_('target/derby/db')=>_('src/main/sql/derby.sql'))
package(:zip).include db
}}}

There's nothing fundamentally wrong with this code, if that's what you intend
to do.  But in practice, you don't always run the @package@ task during
development, so you won't notice if something is wrong with this task when you
build.  For example, if it fails to generate the SQL file.  In addition, the
@package@ task runs after @build@, so you can't use the database in your test
cases.

So let's refactor it.  We're going to use the variable @db@ to reference the
file task that creates the database, and make it a prerequisite of the @build@
task.  And use that same variable again to include the database in the ZIP
package:

{{{!ruby
db = Derby.create(_('target/derby/db')=>_('src/main/sql/derby.sql'))
build db
package(:zip).include db
}}}

Much better.  We're using the same task twice, but since we're using Rake here,
it will only execute once.  In fact, it will only execute if we don't already
have a Derby database, or if it detects a change to the SQL file and needs to
recreate the database.  (Note: @Derby.create@ is not part of Buildr, you can
get
"derby.rake":http://svn.apache.org/repos/asf/incubator/ode/trunk/tasks/derby.rake
here).

Here's another example.  We want to copy some files over as part of the build,
and apply a filter to them.  This time, we're going to extend the @build@ task:

{{{!ruby
build do
  filter('src/specs').into('target/specs').
    using('version'=>version, 'created'=>Time.now).run
end
}}}

The @build@ task is recursive, so running @buildr build@ picks the current
project and runs its @build@ task, which in turn runs the @build@ task on each
of its sub-projects.  One @build@ task to rule them all.


h2. Cleaning

The @build@ task has an evil twin, the @clean@ task.  It's the task you use to
remove all the files created during the build, especially when you mess things
up and want to start all over.

It basically erases the target directories, the one called @target@, and if you
get creative and change the target directory for tasks like @compile@, it will
also erase those.  If you decide to generate files outside the target directory
and want to cleanup after yourself, just extend the @clean@ task.

For example: 

{{{!ruby
clean { rm_rf _('staged') }
}}}

The @rm_rf@ method deletes the directory and all files in it.  It's named after
UNIX's infamous @rm -rf@.  Use it wisely.  This is also a good time to
introduce you to @FileUtils@, a standard Ruby library that contains convenient
methods for creating and deleting directories, copying and moving files, even
comparing two files.  They're all free of charge when you use Buildr.

Now let's "talk about the artifacts":artifacts.html we mentioned before.
