h1. Getting Started

h2.  Installing Buildr

The installation instructions are slightly different for each operating system.
If you are using Ruby, pick the one that best matches your operating system and
target platform.

p(note).  The current release of Buildr for Ruby does not work with Java 6 and
can only be used with Java 1.5 or earlier.  "Buildr for JRuby":#jruby works
nicely with Java 6, consider using that instead.


h3.  Linux

To get started you will need a recent version of Ruby, Ruby Gems and build
tools for compiling native libraries (@make@, @gcc@ and standard headers).

On *RedHat/Fedora* you can use yum to install Ruby and RubyGems, and then
upgrade to the most recent version of RubyGems:

{{{!sh
$ sudo yum install ruby rubygems ruby-devel gcc
$ sudo gem update --system
}}}

On *Ubuntu* you have to install several packages:

{{{!sh
$ sudo apt-get install ruby-full ruby1.8-dev libopenssl-ruby build-essential 
}}}

The Debian package for @rubygems@ will not allow you to install Buildr, so you
need to install RubyGems from source:

{{{!sh
$ curl -OL http://rubyforge.org/frs/download.php/29548/rubygems-1.0.1.tgz
$ tar xzf rubygems-1.0.1.tgz
$ cd rubygems-1.0.1
$ sudo ruby setup.rb
$ sudo ln -s /usr/bin/gem1.8 /usr/bin/gem
}}}

Before installing Buildr, please set the @JAVA_HOME@ environment variable to
point to your JDK distribution.  Next, use Ruby Gem to install Buildr:

{{{!sh
$ sudo env JAVA_HOME=$JAVA_HOME gem install buildr
}}}

To upgrade to a new version or install a specific version:

{{{!sh
$ sudo env JAVA_HOME=$JAVA_HOME gem update buildr
$ sudo env JAVA_HOME=$JAVA_HOME gem install buildr -v 1.3.0
}}}

You can also use this script "to install Buildr on
Linux":scripts/install-linux.sh.  This script will install Buildr or if already
installed, upgrade to a more recent version.  It will also install Ruby 1.8.6
if not already installed (using @yum@ or @apt-get@) and upgrage RubyGems to
1.0.1.


h3.  OS/X

OS/X 10.5 (Leopard) comes with a recent version of Ruby 1.8.6.  OS/X 10.4
(Tiger) includes an older version of Ruby, we recommend you first install Ruby
1.8.6 using MacPorts (@sudo port install ruby rb-rubygems@), Fink or the
"Ruby One-Click Installer for OS/X":http://rubyosx.rubyforge.org/.

We recommend you first upgrade to the latest version of Ruby gems:

{{{!sh
$ sudo gem update --system
}}}

Before installing Buildr, please set the @JAVA_HOME@ environment variable to
point to your JDK distribution:

{{{!sh
$ export JAVA_HOME=/Library/Java/Home
}}}

To install Buildr:

{{{!sh
$ sudo env JAVA_HOME=$JAVA_HOME gem install buildr
}}}

To upgrade to a new version or install a specific version:

{{{!sh
$ sudo env JAVA_HOME=$JAVA_HOME gem update buildr
$ sudo env JAVA_HOME=$JAVA_HOME gem install buildr -v 1.3.0
}}}

You can also use this script "to install Buildr on
OS/X":scripts/install-osx.sh.  This script will install Buildr or if already
installed, upgrade to a more recent version.  It will also install Ruby 1.8.6
if not already installed (using MacPorts) and upgrage RubyGems to 1.0.1.


h3. Windows

If you don't already have Ruby installed, now is the time to do it.  The
easiest way to install Ruby is using the "one-click
installer":http://rubyinstaller.rubyforge.org/.

We recommend you first upgrade to the latest version of Ruby gems:

{{{!sh
> gem update --system
}}}

Before installing Buildr, please set the @JAVA_HOME@ environment variable to
point to your JDK distribution.  Next, use Ruby Gem to install Buildr:

{{{!sh
> gem install buildr
}}}

Buildr uses several libraries that include native extensions.  During
installation it will ask you to pick a platform for these libraries.  By
selecting @mswin32@ it will download and install pre-compiled DLLs for these
extensions.

To upgrade to a new version or install a specific version:

{{{!sh
> gem update buildr
> gem install buildr -v 1.3.0
}}}


h3. JRuby

If you don't already have JRuby 1.1RC3 or later installed, you can download it
from the "JRuby site":http://dist.codehaus.org/jruby/.

After uncompressing JRuby, update your @PATH@ to include both @java@ and @jruby@
executables.

For Linux and OS/X:

{{{!sh
$ export PATH=$PATH:[path to JRuby]/bin:$JAVA_HOME/bin
$ gem install buildr
}}}

For Windows:

{{{!sh
> set PATH=%PATH%;[path to JRuby]/bin;%JAVA_HOME%/bin
> gem install buildr
}}}

To upgrade to a new version or install a specific version:

{{{!sh
$ sudo gem update buildr
$ sudo gem install buildr -v 1.3.0
}}}

You can also use this script "to install Buildr on
JRuby":scripts/install-jruby.sh.  This script will install Buildr or if already
installed, upgrade to a more recent version.  If necessary, it will also
install JRuby 1.1RC3 in @/opt/jruby@ and update the @PATH@ variable in
@~/.bash_profile@ or @~/.profile@.

*Important: Running JRuby and Ruby side by side*

Ruby and JRuby maintain separate Gem repositories, and in fact install
slightly different versions of the Buildr Gem (same functionality, different
dependencies).  Installing Buildr for Ruby does not install it for JRuby and
vice versa.

If you have JRuby installed but not Ruby, the @gem@ and @buildr@ commands will
use JRuby.  If you have both JRuby and Ruby installed, follow the instructions
below.  To find out if you have Ruby installed (some operating systems include
it by default), run @ruby --version@ from the command line.

To work exclusively with JRuby, make sure it shows first on the path, for example,
by setting @PATH=/opt/jruby/bin:$PATH@.

You can use JRuby and Ruby side by side, by running scripts with the @-S@
command line argument.  For example:

{{{!
$ # with Ruby
$ ruby -S gem install buildr
$ ruby -S buildr
$ # with JRuby
$ jruby -S gem install buildr
$ jruby -S buildr
}}}

Run @buildr --version@ from the command line to find which version of Buildr
you are using by default.  If you see @(JRuby ...)@, Buildr is running on that
version of JRuby.


h2. Conventions

Lines that start with @$@ are command lines, for example:

{{{!sh
$ # Run Buildr
$ buildr
}}}

Lines that start with @=>@ show output from the console or the result of a
method, for example:

{{{!sh
puts 'Hello world'
=> "Hello world"
}}}

And as you guessed, everything else is Buildfile Ruby or Java code.  You can
figure out which language is which.



h2. Running Buildr

You need a *Buildfile*, a build script that tells Buildr all about the projects
it's building, what they contain, what to produce, and so on.  The Buildfile
resides in the root directory of your project.  We'll talk more about it in
"the next chapter":projects.html.  If you don't already have one, ask Buildr to
create it:

{{{!sh
$ buildr
}}}

p(tip). You'll notice that Buildr creates a file called @buildfile@.  It's
case sensitive, but Buildr will look for either @buildfile@ or @Buildfile@.
You can also use @Rakefile@ or @rakefile@ for compatibility with previous
versions of Buildr.

You use Buildr by running the @buildr@ command:

{{{!sh
$ buildr [options] [tasks] [name=value]
}}}

There are several options you can use, for a full list of options type:

{{{!sh
$ buildr --help
}}}

|_. Option                  |_. Usage |
| @-f/--buildfile [file]@   | Specify the buildfile.                                  |
| @-e/--environment [name]@ | Environment name (e.g. development, test, production).  |
| @-h/--help@               | Display this help message.                              |
| @-n/--nosearch@           | Do not search parent directories for the buildfile.     |
| @-q/--quiet@              | Do not log messages to standard output.                 |
| @-r/--require [file]@     | Require MODULE before executing buildfile.              |
| @-t/--trace@              | Turn on invoke/execute tracing, enable full backtrace.  |
| @-v/--version@            | Display the program version.                            |

You can tell Buildr to run specific tasks and the order to run them.  For
example:

{{{!sh
# Clean and rebuild
buildr clean build
# Package and install
buildr install
}}}

If you don't specify a task, Buildr will run the "@build@ task":building.html,
compiling source code and running test cases.  Running a task may run other
tasks as well, for example, running the @install@ task will also run @package@.

There are several "environment
variables":settings_profiles.html#environment_variables that let you control
how Buildr works, for example, to skip test cases during a build, or specify
options for the JVM.  Depending on the variable, you may want to set it once in
your environment, or set a different value each time you run Buildr.

For example:

{{{!sh
$ export JAVA_OPTS='-Xms1g -Xmx1g'
$ buildr TEST=no
}}}


h2. Help Tasks

Buildr includes a number of informative tasks.  Currently that number stands at
two, but we'll be adding more tasks in future releases.  These tasks report
information from the Buildfile, so you need one to run them.  For more general
help (version number, command line arguments, etc) use @buildr --help@.

To start with, type:

{{{!sh
$ buildr help
}}}

You can list the name and description of all your projects using the
@help:projects@ task.  For example:

{{{!sh
$ buildr help:projects
killer-app                 # Code. Build. ??? Profit!
killer-app:teh-api         # Abstract classes and interfaces
killer-app:teh-impl        # All those implementation details
killer-app:la-web          # What our users see
}}}

You are, of course, describing your projects for the sake of those who will
maintain your code, right?  To describe a project, or a task, call the @desc@
method before the project or task definition.

So next let's talk about "projects":projects.html.


h2. More Info

*API* The "Buildr API":http://incubator.apache.org/buildr/rdoc/index.html
documentation.

*Rake* Buildr is based on Rake, a Ruby build system that handles tasks and
dependencies.  Check out the "Rake documentation":http://docs.rubyrake.org/ for
more information.

*AntWrap* Buildr uses AntWrap, for configuring and running Ant tasks.  You can
learn more from the "Antwrap documentation":http://antwrap.rubyforge.org/.

*YAML* Buildr uses YAML for its profiles.  You can "learn more about YAML
here":http://www.yaml.org, and use this handy "YAML quick
reference":http://www.yaml.org/refcard.html.
