h1. Welcome

Buildr is a build system for Java applications.  We wanted something that's
simple and intuitive to use, so we only need to tell it what to do, and it
takes care of the rest.  But also something we can easily extend for those
one-off tasks, with a language that's a joy to use.  And of course, we wanted
it to be fast, reliable and have outstanding dependency management.

Here's what we got:

* A simple way to specify projects, and build large projects out of smaller
sub-projects.
* Pre-canned tasks that require the least amount of configuration, keeping the
build script DRY and simple.
* Compiling, copying and filtering resources, JUnit/TestNG test cases, APT
source code generation, Javadoc and more.
* A dependency mechanism that only builds what has changed since the last
release.
* A drop-in replacement for Maven 2.0, Buildr uses the same file layout,
artifact specifications, local and remote repositories.
* All your Ant tasks belong to us! Anything you can do with Ant, you can do
with Buildr.
* No overhead for building "plugins" or configuration. Just write new tasks or
functions.
* Buildr is Ruby all the way down.  No one-off task is too demanding when you
write code using variables, functions and objects.
* Simple way to upgrade to new versions.
* Did we mention fast?


h2.  News

Check out "all that's new in Buildr 1.3":whats_new.html.

* Buildr 1.3 now runs on JRuby 1.1
* Support for building Scala projects
* Support for building Groovy projects
* EAR packages
* Profiles
* New API for accessing Java libraries
* Alternative source layouts
* More documentation
* Other features and bug fixes.


h2.  Notices

The Apache Software Foundation is a non-profit organization, consider
"sponsoring":http://www.apache.org/foundation/sponsorship.html and check the
"thanks":http://www.apache.org/foundation/thanks.html page.

Apache Buildr is an effort undergoing incubation at The Apache Software
Foundation (ASF), sponsored by the Apache Incubator. Incubation is required of
all newly accepted projects until a further review indicates that the
infrastructure, communications, and decision making process have stabilized in
a manner consistent with other successful ASF projects. While incubation status
is not necessarily a reflection of the completeness or stability of the code,
it does indicate that the project has yet to be fully endorsed by the ASF.

"ColorCons":http://www.mouserunner.com/Spheres_ColoCons1_Free_Icons.html,
copyright of Ken Saunders.  "DejaVu fonts":http://dejavu.sourceforge.net,
copyright of Bitstream, Inc.
